# Gaining Awareness

template: TEMPLATE.html

## Why we should bother

Green software development refers to the practice of developing software in an environmentally friendly and sustainable manner.
It focuses on reducing the environmental impact of software throughout its lifecycle, including development, deployment, and maintenance.

### Environmental Impact

The IT industry, including software development, has a significant carbon footprint. 
By adopting green software development practices, we can reduce energy consumption, minimize electronic waste, 
and lower greenhouse gas emissions. This helps to mitigate the negative impact on the environment and 
contribute to a more sustainable future.

Green software development can also help to address the growing problem of e-waste. 
By designing software that is energy-efficient and resource-conscious, we can reduce the 
environmental impact of electronic devices and extend their lifespan. This can help to 
reduce the amount of electronic waste that ends up in landfills and contribute to a 
more sustainable approach to technology.

It is important to have metrics in place to measure the environmental impact of software development.
By tracking energy consumption, carbon emissions, and resource usage, we can identify areas for improvement.
From a business point of view, the best way to start, is to think about policies and procedures that can be implemented.
This can be as simple as: <i>"Turn off the lights when you leave the office"</i>, 
<i>"Use darkmode in applications and on websites whenever possible"</i> or a more complex policy as: 
<i>"Implement a policy that automatically turns off the servers when they are not in use"</i>.

### Cost Savings

Green software development can lead to cost savings in terms of energy consumption and resource utilization. 
By optimizing code, reducing server loads, and implementing efficient algorithms, we can reduce the amount
of energy required to run software applications. This not only benefits the environment but also helps 
organizations save on energy costs.

We, as developers, have been spoiled with faster and faster computers, and more storage capacity than ever. 
But we have to remember that this does not mean we can be wasteful. We have to think about the resources we use,
down to the size of a record in a database and the number of code lines in a file. The Appollo Space Program
had to think about the weight of the ink in the pens they used, and the computers they used had less capacity
than the phone you are holding in your hand right now. This is a good reminder that we can create amazing things,
even with limited resources.

### User Experience

Green software development can improve the user experience by creating more efficient and responsive applications. 
Optimized code and efficient algorithms result in faster load times, smoother performance, and reduced resource usage. 
This leads to a better user experience and increased customer satisfaction.

To get a better user experience, does not always mean that the software itself will be less complicated. For instance,
moving data to cold storage when it is used less frequently, will reduce the amount of energy that is used to store 
the data, but it will also increase the complexity of the software.

### Corporate Social Responsibility

Many organizations are now prioritizing sustainability and environmental responsibility as part 
of their corporate social responsibility initiatives. By adopting green software development practices, 
companies can demonstrate their commitment to sustainability and attract environmentally conscious 
customers and partners.

The European Union has a directive that requires all companies to report on their environmental impact.
This directive is called the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD). The directive requires 
companies to report on their environmental impact, social impact, and impact on human rights.

### Useful links

[Read more about the EU 2022/2464 directive](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32022L2464)

## Turn the Monitor Off

Next time you press the power button to turn on your monitor, listen for it: a small pop along with the whirring of fans in your computer. This noise is indicative of the small surge of energy that occurs every time you power on the monitor for your computer. This energy surge may leave you wondering whether it is economically worth it to shut off your monitor. As a general rule of thumb, to save energy you should turn off your monitor if you are going to be away from your computer for 20 minutes or more.

### Sleep Mode

Just about every computer comes with a Sleep Mode option. It is an option on your computer that you can use to send it into a monitor-off, low-power mode after a certain period of time when not in use. Telling your computer when to automatically turn off its screen is not just an energy-saving, environmentally friendly idea, it can also save you cash. According to a study preformed by Iolo Labs, you can save around $2 per month from your drop in energy usage when you put your PC to sleep at night.

### Power Down Completely

Some people do not like powering down their computers completely because of the amount of time it takes to start up a computer. However, for further energy savings, you should completely power down your computer if you are not going to be using it for two or more hours. The U.S. Department of Energy suggests connecting your computer and its peripheral devices to the same power strip. That way after you power down your computer, you can shut off the power strip to save even more energy.

### Meet in the Middle

If reboot time has you wary of shutting your computer off completely, enable power management features built into your computer. These features vary among computer models but dimming your computer screen is an example of a power management feature found in most operating systems. By enabling these energy-saving features in addition to using Sleep Mode, you can bring your yearly energy bill savings up to €50.

### Useful links

[Source](https://sciencing.com/conserve-energy-daily-life-2327.html)